Part 1: Create Your AWS EC2 Instance (Your Virtual Server)

This is the virtual computer in the cloud where Jenkins will live.

    Log in to AWS: Go to the AWS Management Console and log in.

    Navigate to EC2: In the search bar, type "EC2" and select it from the results.

    Launch Instance: Click the "Launch instance" button.

    Name Your Instance: In the "Name" field, give it an easy-to-remember name, like Jenkins-Server.

    Choose an AMI (Operating System):

        Select Ubuntu.

        Make sure the "Amazon Machine Image (AMI)" dropdown shows an Ubuntu Server LTS version (like 22.04 or 20.04). It should be marked "Free tier eligible."

    Choose an Instance Type:

        Select t2.micro. This is crucial as it's part of the AWS Free Tier, so you won't be charged (within limits).

    Create a Key Pair (Your Server's Password):

        This is how you'll securely connect to your server.

        Click "Create new key pair".

        Key pair name: jenkins-key

        Key pair type: RSA

        Private key file format:

            Select .pem if you are on Mac or Linux.

            Select .ppk if you are on Windows using PuTTY.

        Click "Create key pair". Your browser will immediately download this file (e.g., jenkins-key.pem). Guard this file! You cannot download it again.

    Configure Network Settings (Firewall):

        Click the "Edit" button next to "Network settings."

        You'll see a "Security group" section. This is your server's firewall.

        Find the "Inbound security groups rules" section.

        By default, it might have a rule for SSH (port 22). This is correct.

        Source type: For the SSH rule, change "Anywhere" to "My IP". This is much more secure and means only your computer can connect to the server's terminal.

        We will add the Jenkins port (8080) later, just as you planned.

    Launch:

        Leave "Configure storage" at the default (8GB is fine).

        Review the summary and click "Launch instance".

Part 2: Connect to Your Instance via SSH

Now you'll connect to your new server's command line.

    Go to Instances: Click "View all instances." Wait until your Jenkins-Server instance state says "Running" and "Status check" is "2/2 checks passed".

    Get Connection Info: Select your instance by checking the box next to it. At the top, click the "Connect" button.

    Select SSH Client: Click the "SSH client" tab.

    Open Your Terminal:

        Mac/Linux: Open the "Terminal" app.

        Windows: Open "Command Prompt," "PowerShell," or (recommended) "Git Bash."

    Run the Commands:

        Navigate to your key: Your downloaded .pem file is probably in your "Downloads" folder. In your terminal, type cd ~/Downloads (or wherever you saved the key).

        Set permissions: Copy the chmod command from the AWS page (it will look like chmod 400 jenkins-key.pem). This locks the file so only you can read it.

        Connect: Copy the example ssh command (e.g., ssh -i "jenkins-key.pem" ubuntu@ec2-xx-xx-xx-xx.compute-1.amazonaws.com) and paste it into your terminal. Press Enter.

    Approve Connection: The first time you connect, it will ask, "Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no)?" Type yes and press Enter.

You are now logged into your Ubuntu server! The prompt will change to something like ubuntu@ip-172-xx-xx-xx:~$.

Part 3: Install Java

Jenkins is a Java application, so it needs the Java Runtime Environment (JRE) to run.

    Update Package Lists: This command downloads the latest list of available software.
    Bash

sudo apt update

Install OpenJDK 11: This command installs the Java Development Kit, version 11 (a stable, long-term support version that works perfectly with Jenkins). The -y flag automatically says "yes" to the installation.
Bash

sudo apt install openjdk-11-jdk -y

Verify Installation: Check that Java is correctly installed.
Bash

    java -version

    You should see output that says "openjdk version 11.x.x".

Part 4: Install Jenkins

Now you'll add the official Jenkins software repository and install it.

    Add the Jenkins GPG Key: This key verifies that the software you're downloading is authentic and from the real Jenkins project.
    Bash

curl -fsSL https://pkg.jenkins.io/debian-stable/jenkins.io-2023.key | sudo tee \
  /usr/share/keyrings/jenkins-keyring.asc > /dev/null

Add the Jenkins Repository: This command tells your server where to find the Jenkins software packages.
Bash

echo deb [signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/jenkins-keyring.asc] \
  https://pkg.jenkins.io/debian-stable binary/ | sudo tee \
  /etc/apt/sources.list.d/jenkins.list > /dev/null

Update Package Lists Again: You must run update again so your server reads the new Jenkins repository you just added.
Bash

sudo apt-get update

Install Jenkins: Finally, install Jenkins itself!
Bash

    sudo apt-get install jenkins -y

Part 5: Start and Enable Jenkins Service

Jenkins is installed, but it's not running yet.

    Start the Service: This command starts the Jenkins service right now.
    Bash

sudo systemctl start jenkins

Enable the Service: This command tells the server to automatically start Jenkins every time the server reboots. This is very important!
Bash

sudo systemctl enable jenkins

Check the Status: Let's make sure it's running properly.
Bash

    sudo systemctl status jenkins

    You should see text in green that says active (running). Press q to exit the status view.

Part 6: Open the Firewall (Port 8080)

Jenkins is running, but your AWS firewall (the Security Group) is still blocking access. You need to open port 8080.

    Go to EC2 Security Groups: Go back to your AWS Console tab. You can either:

        Go to the EC2 Instances page, select your Jenkins-Server, and click the "Security" tab below.

        Click the link for the security group (e.g., sg-0123...).

    Edit Inbound Rules: In the security group's page, find the "Inbound rules" tab and click "Edit inbound rules".

    Add the Jenkins Rule:

        Click "Add rule".

        Type: Select "Custom TCP".

        Port range: Type 8080.

        Source: Select "Anywhere (0.0.0.0/0)". This lets anyone on the internet access your Jenkins page. (For better security, you could also select "My IP").

    Save Rules: Click the "Save rules" button.

Part 7: Unlock Jenkins in Your Browser

Now for the final setup!

    Get Your Server's IP: Go back to the EC2 Instances page. Select your Jenkins-Server and look in the "Details" tab for the "Public IPv4 address". Copy this address.

    Open Jenkins in Browser: Open a new browser tab and go to: http://<YOUR_PUBLIC_IPV4_ADDRESS>:8080 (Replace <YOUR_PUBLIC_IPV4_ADDRESS> with the IP you just copied).

    Unlock Jenkins: You will see an "Unlock Jenkins" screen asking for an administrator password.

    Get the Password: The page tells you the password is in a file on your server.

        Go back to your SSH terminal.

        Type the following command to display the password:
        Bash

        sudo cat /var/lib/jenkins/secrets/initialAdminPassword

    Copy and Paste: A long string of letters and numbers will appear in your terminal. Copy this string.

    Continue: Paste the password into the "Administrator password" box in your browser and click "Continue".

Part 8: Final Configuration

You're on the home stretch!

    Install Plugins: You'll be asked to customize Jenkins. Click the big button for "Install suggested plugins".

    This will take a few minutes as Jenkins downloads and installs all the standard, essential plugins.

    Create Admin User: Once the plugins are installed, you'll be asked to create your first admin user.

        Fill in your username, password, full name, and email address.

        Do not skip this! This is the account you will use to log in from now on.

        Click "Save and Continue".

    Instance Configuration: The next page will ask for the "Jenkins URL". It should already be filled in with your IP address (e.g., http://xx.xx.xx.xx:8080/). This is correct.

        Click "Save and Finish".

    All Done! You will see a "Jenkins is ready!" page.

        Click "Start using Jenkins".

Congratulations! You will be taken to your new Jenkins dashboard. You have successfully installed and configured Jenkins on an AWS EC2 instance. 🎉
